
# **Blowback and a Failed American Foreign Policy**


Lamont Kimberlin

5 April 2015


The foreign policy of the United States has not only produced death, starvation, and increased chaos around the world; but it has also created a system by which irrational and irresponsible programs are carried out in the name of spreading democracy (Johnson). For example, hundreds of pounds of one-hundred dollar bills were sent to Iraq and distributed by American soldiers to Iraqi fighters, including fighters partnered or associated with al-Qaeda (Jasper). American foreign policy architects, including those elected and appointed, must put an end to the bribes, corrupt activity, and secret operations which shape U.S. foreign policy, and directly contribute to the deaths and injuries of hundreds of thousands of American soldiers and innocent civilians, while endangering the national security of America. These responsible parties must replace these failed and atrocious policies with a foreign policy based on diplomacy and peace by leading the world through an exceptional example, and only using lethal force in the case of national defense. It is crucial to understand the term “blowback” in order to comprehend the scope and impact of these chain of events set in motion by foreign military and covert interventions.

The term “blowback” was coined within formerly classified memorandums written by the CIA in March of 1954 concerning the coup d'état for British Petroleum in 1953 (Johnson).  Blowback is essentially “a metaphor for the unintended consequences of the US government's international activities that have been kept secret from the American people” (Johnson).  One could easily conclude with inductive and deductive reasoning that all actions carry with them the manifestations of direct and indirect consequences. There exists direct evidence which can be collected, verified, and analyzed. There are also conclusions which come with very high probabilities and can be calculated and assumed. For instance, regarding the increased hostility toward the U.S. and her allies due to secret wars and imperialistic conquests. It is time to examine the idea of cause and effect in what is carried out in policy.

An example of cause and effect can be found in the story of Osama bin Laden. Osama bin Laden was of a wealthy Saudi family and was employed by the CIA to help radicalize the "freedom fighters" of Afghanistan against the Soviet Union’s invasion in 1979, and into the 1980’s (Johnson). The “blowback” from this would manifest itself in the formation of al-Qaeda, headed by the extremely wealthy bin Laden with his years of CIA training (Johnson). The U.S. would go on to directly finance, train, and weaponized sub groups of al-Qaeda throughout the Middle East and Eastern Europe from the 1990’s to present date (Johnson). Although many of these covert tactics are used in the Middle East, many are executed in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and beyond (Johnson). 

For example, the United States even established a military school in Panama in 1946, later moving it to Fort Benning, Georgia in 1984; but only after President Jorge Illueca of Panama sent the facility packing (Johnson). The tactics which were taught included, “counterinsurgency, military intelligence, interrogation techniques, sniper fire, infantry and commando tactics, psychological warfare and jungle operations” (Johnson). Over 60,000 people would attend this covert military school including “Manuel Noriega (now serving a forty-year sentence in an American jail for drug trafficking) and Omar Torrijos of Panama; Guillermo Rodrigues of Ecuador; Juan Velasco Alvarado of Peru; Leopoldo Galtieri, former head of Argentina's junta; and Hugo Banzer Suarez of Bolivia. More recently, Peru's Vladimiro Montesinos, SOA class of 1965” (Johnson). These examples are just the outer edges of what is contained within the details, and the devil is in the details. The idea that America is attacked for her freedoms is an irrational notion and riddled with illogical fallacies. Actions bear responsibility for the consequences in which they manifest.  

Sheldon Richman’s “Foreign Policy Failure Everywhere,” as published in Reason, reports on the unintended consequences of NATO’s foreign policy in the Middle East (Richman). The policies of the United States have initiated the establishment of ISIS cells throughout the Middle East, and even the backing of neo-fascists in the Ukraine (Richman). Obama argues for “unlimited war power” to continue and expand upon the mess that has been created and sent down from administration to administration, year after year (Richman). Logical analysis demonstrates that continuing the same failed policies would continue to produce failed outcomes. It is clearly time for policy makers to legitimize the strategies of globalization and to reject the policing the world, which is historically the demise of all great nations through bankruptcy and being overextended far across geographical lines. 

In closing statements, logical reasoning should make it clear to see that violence begets violence, and that American involvement within the internal affairs of foreign nations creates dangerous repercussions for the innocent. All elected officials and their appointees, as well as anyone in a position to make a positive impact on America’s foreign policy, are needed immediately to restore law, order, and justice for the American public. For those who have taken an oath of office, they are obligated to act accordingly. The United States must lead by example and demonstrate its virtue through implementation of a foreign policy of strength, diplomacy, and peace. It’s up to the policy makers to end the madness of arming terrorists.


                   **Works Cited**

*Jasper, William F. "Global Blowback." The New American, Apr 28 2008: 18-9. ProQuest. Web. 3 May 2015./*

*Johnson, Chalmers. "Blowback." Nation 273.11 (2001): 13-15. MAS Ultra - School Edition [EBSCO]. Web. 3 May 2015.*

*Richman, Sheldon. "Foreign Policy Failure Everywhere." Reason Foundation, 19 Feb. 2015. Web. 03 May 2015.*